Add a tutorial for adding a new test group (#48)
E3SM-Project/polaris: docs/tutorials/dev_add_test_group.md

future) as well as the name of the test case. We add resolution to the 
docstring for both the class (where we describe the `resolution` attribute) and
the constructor (where we describe the `resolution` argument or parameter).  

The `default` test case doesn't do anything yet because we haven't added
any steps, but let's add it to the `baroclinic_channel` test group so we can
see how the resolution will be specified.  We add the following to the file
`__init__.py` that defines the `BaroclinicChannel` test group:

```{code-block} python
:emphasize-lines: 2, 17-19

from polaris.ocean.tests.baroclinic_channel.default import Default
from polaris import TestGroup

class BaroclinicChannel(TestGroup):
    """
    A test group for baroclinic channel test cases
    """
    def __init__(self, component):
        """
        component : polaris.ocean.Ocean
            the ocean component that this test group belongs to
        """
        super().__init__(component=component,
                         name='baroclinic_channel')

        for resolution in [1., 4., 10.]:
            self.add_test_case(
                Default(test_group=self, resolution=resolution))
```

> 

Reviewer: I think it's nice to add this text so folks can verify this for themselves

> 

Author: Okay, I missed that this was before we had added any steps.

      - layerThickness
```
Finally, you can add completely new streams that don't exist in the default
model config files to a step by defining all of the relevant streams attributes
and contents.  We don't demonstrate that in this tutorial.

Another way to set model config options is to use a python dictionary and to 
call {py:meth}`polaris.ModelStep.add_model_config_options()`.  This is the way 
to handle namelist options that depend on parameters (such as resolution) that
are not known in advance.  In this case, we use this technique to set the 
model config option for the viscosity `config_mom_del2` using the parameter 
`nu` passed into the constructor (if it is not `None`, indicating that it was 
not set).

```python
from polaris.ocean.model import OceanModelStep

class Forward(OceanModelStep):
    def __init__(self, test_case, resolution, name='forward', subdir=None,
                 ntasks=None, min_tasks=None, openmp_threads=1, nu=None,
                 run_time_steps=None):
        ...

        if nu is not None:
            # update the viscosity to the requested value
            self.add_model_config_options(options=dict(config_mom_del2=nu))
```

> ### Computing the cell count

Reviewer: I'd move this section toward the end, as an "enhancement". My thinking is that folks would make the simplest possible test work, then if there is time, add in these features.

{py:func}`polaris.mesh.planar.compute_planar_hex_nx_ny()` to get `nx` and `ny`
(and thus the total cell count) during setup because we have no other way to
get them (the initial condition has not yet been created, for example).  But
at runtime, rather than recomputing them, we look at the initial condition
file that must exist (otherwise the step already would have failed) to see
what the actual number of cells ended up being.

`cell_count` is used in `OceanModelStep` to compute `ntasks` and `min_tasks`
by also using 2 config options:
```cfg
# Options related the ocean component
[ocean]

# the number of cells per core to aim for
goal_cells_per_core = 200

# the approximate maximum number of cells per core (the test will fail if too
# few cores are available)
max_cells_per_core = 2000
```

This method is only used if `ntasks` and `min_tasks` aren't explicitly defined
as parameters to the constructor.

So far, there isn't a equivalent process for MALI, so `ntasks` and `min_tasks`
should be set explicitly either when constructing a test case or by overriding
the {py:meth}`polaris.Step.setup()` or 
{py:meth}`polaris.Step.constrain_resources()` methods.

> ### Adding dynamic model config options

Reviewer: > I'd move this section toward the end, as an "enhancement". My thinking is that folks would make the simplest possible test work, then if there is time, add in these features.

Same here

        """
        super().__init__(test_case=test_case, name='viz')
        self.add_input_file(
            filename='initial_state.nc',
            target='../initial_state/initial_state.nc')
        self.add_input_file(
            filename='output.nc',
            target='../forward/output.nc')

    def run(self):
        """
        Run this step of the test case
        """
        ds_mesh = xr.load_dataset('initial_state.nc')
        ds = xr.load_dataset('output.nc')
        t_index = ds.sizes['Time'] - 1
        plot_horiz_field(ds, ds_mesh, 'temperature',
                         'final_temperature.png', t_index=t_index)
        max_velocity = np.max(np.abs(ds.normalVelocity.values))
        plot_horiz_field(ds, ds_mesh, 'normalVelocity',
                         'final_normalVelocity.png',
                         t_index=t_index,
                         vmin=-max_velocity, vmax=max_velocity,
                         cmap='cmo.balance', show_patch_edges=True)
```

It makes images of the final temperature and normal velocity from a forward
step.  Since all the pieces of this step have been covered in the other 2 
steps, we won't describe this step in any more detail.

> ### Adding the steps to the test case

Reviewer: In terms of using the tutorial to make a new test case on the fly, I prefer to add each step to the test case as I've completed it and test that it works before moving onto the next one. So this section would be replicated earlier for just the `initial_state` step, then adding `forward`

class Default(TestCase):
    def validate(self):
        """
        Compare ``temperature``, ``salinity``, ``layerThickness`` and
        ``normalVelocity`` in the ``forward`` step with a baseline if one was
        provided.
        """
        super().validate()

        variables = ['temperature', 'salinity', 'layerThickness']
        compare_variables(test_case=self, variables=variables,
                          filename1='initial_state/initial_state.nc')

        variables = ['temperature', 'salinity', 'layerThickness',
                     'normalVelocity']
        compare_variables(test_case=self, variables=variables,
                          filename1='forward/output.nc')
```
We check salinity, temperature and layer thickness in both the initial state
and forward steps, and the normal velocity only in the forward step (it's
initialized to zero in the initial state so we feel confident that we can skip
it, though validating it would certainly do no harm).  Since we only provide
`filename1` in each call to {py:func}`polaris.validate.compare_variables()`,
we will only do this validation if a user has set up the test case with a
baseline, see {ref}`dev-validation`.

> ### Test things out!

Reviewer: Now I see this section. As I mentioned before, I prefer to move this up earlier, so that folks can check if their test appears after adding the minimum amount of code necessary.

however many nodes you need (most often 1 when you're just debugging something
small) and for a long enough time that your debugging doesn't get interrupted,
e.g. on Chrysalis:
```bash
$ cd <work_dir>
$ srun -N 1 -t 2:00:00 --pty bash
```
Then, on the interactive node, source the local link the load script and run:
```bash
$ source load_polaris_env.sh
$ polaris serial
```

(Later on, there will be a `polaris run` command that runs in task parallel,
and this should be the default way you run, but for now you can only run in
task-serial mode, where your test cases and steps run one after the other.)

One important aspect of this testing will be to change config options in the 
work directory and make sure the test case is modified in the expected way.  If
you change `lx` and `ly`, does the domain size change in the plots as expected?
What happens to the initial condition when you change the physical parameters?  
How is the time step and simulation duration changed when you modify 
`dt_per_km` and `btr_dt_per_km`? Obviously, these are only example of things 
you might try to stress-test your own test case.

(dev-tutorial-add-test-group-add-shared-superclass)=

> ## Adding a shared "superclass" for test cases

Reviewer: This would also go in the "enhancements" section

    cores.
    """

    def __init__(self, test_group, resolution):
        """
        Create the test case

        Parameters
        ----------
        test_group : polaris.ocean.tests.baroclinic_channel.BaroclinicChannel
            The test group that this test case belongs to

        resolution : float
            The resolution of the test case in km
        """
        super().__init__(test_group=test_group, resolution=resolution,
                         name='default')

        self.add_step(
            Forward(test_case=self, ntasks=4, min_tasks=4, openmp_threads=1,
                    resolution=resolution, run_time_steps=3))

        self.add_step(
            Viz(test_case=self))

    def validate(self):
        """
        Compare ``temperature``, ``salinity``, ``layerThickness`` and
        ``normalVelocity`` in the ``forward`` step with a baseline if one was
        provided.
        """
        super().validate()
        variables = ['temperature', 'salinity', 'layerThickness',
                     'normalVelocity']
        compare_variables(test_case=self, variables=variables,
                          filename1='forward/output.nc')

```

> ## Adding another test case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adding a parameter study
```

My inclination would be to keep this section (and down to L2126) short to just the bits of code that are relevant to setting up a parameter study, but since you've already written it, you could point out the relevant bits if we are going through it together or leave it as future reading.

Author: I don't feel too strongly about keeping the longer version of this, so feel free to shorten it (or I can).

we make the directory `polaris/ocean/tests/yet_another_channel/default`, then
we add an empty `__init__.py` file into it. As a starting point, we'll create
a new `Default` class in this file that descends from the
{py:class}`polaris.TestCase` base class (take a look at
`polaris/testcase.py` if you want to see the contents of `TestCase` if
you're interested).

```python
from polaris import TestCase

class Default(TestCase):
    """
    The default test case for the "yet another channel" test group simply creates
    the mesh and initial condition, then performs a short forward run on 4
    cores.
    """

    def __init__(self, test_group):
        """
        Create the test case

        Parameters
        ----------
        test_group : polaris.ocean.tests.yet_another_channel.YetAnotherChannel
            The test group that this test case belongs to
        """
        name = 'default'
        super().__init__(test_group=test_group, name=name)
```

As a starting point, we just pass along the test group (`YetAnotherChannel`)
this test case belongs to on to the base class's constructor
(`super().__init__()`) and give the test case a name, `default`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though this test case doesn't do anything, we can list the tests and make
sure your new one shows up:

```bash
$ polaris list

Testcases:
...
   9: ocean/yet_another_channel/default
[end ```bash]

If they don't show up, you probably missed a step (adding the test group to the
component or the test case to the test group).  If you get import errors or
syntax errors, you'll need to fix those first.

```

Author: I don't think we've added `Default` to the test group at this point, so this isn't going to do anything yet.  Your comment lower down might be where that's appropriate.

Author: Or I can edit the tutorial to add the test case to the test group here, and list it even though it doesn't do anything.  That's a little more back-and-forth between test group, test case and steps but I think that's okay.

Reviewer: Yes, I think it's best to add it to the default case first here, without the resolution argument. I personally think it's easier to understand what's going on if you have a chance to build the test group/case up slowly with a lot of back-and-forth.

Author: I've done this and will push changes soon.

(dev-tutorial-add-test-group-vary-res)=

## Varying resolution and other parameters

For "yet another channel" tests, we know that we want each test to be at a single

> resolution but that we want multiple versions of at least some of the tests
> for different resolutions.  We also want a lot of flexibility in determining

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resolution but let's suppose that we want multiple versions of the
`yet_another_channel` test for different resolutions.

We also want a lot of flexibility in determining 
```

just by passing different values for the resolution.  The same could apply for
many other parameters, such as the horizontal viscosity in the model, the type
of vertical coordinate, or whether or not a test case includes a type of 
forcing (e.g. tides).  There is little restriction on what types of parameters
can be used to create variants of a test case. We'll see what this looks like
in the next few sections.

There are also types of test cases where a single parameter is varied *within*
the test case (e.g. with different steps each performing a simulation with its 
own parameter value, and then a step analyzing the behavior as the parameter 
varies).  The "yet another channel" test group includes the RPE (reference
potential energy) test case that explores the behavior of the test case at
different horizontal viscosities in this way.  In this situation, it is more
convenient for the parameter values to come from config options than to be
hard-coded when the test case is created.  This allows users who want to
explore non-default parameter values to change the config options before
running the test case.  We'll see in more detail what that looks like later in
the tutorial.

> For now, we plan to support 3 resolutions in `yet_another_channel` test cases: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say you want to support 3 resolutions in `yet_another_channel` test cases: 
```

we can create the initial condition.  It would be good to make sure what we've 
done so far works well before we move on.  

The first way to test things out is just to list the tests and make sure your
new ones show up:

```bash
$ polaris list

Testcases:
   0: ocean/baroclinic_channel/10km/default
   1: ocean/baroclinic_channel/10km/decomp_test
   2: ocean/baroclinic_channel/10km/restart_test
   3: ocean/baroclinic_channel/10km/threads_test
   4: ocean/baroclinic_channel/1km/rpe_test
   5: ocean/baroclinic_channel/4km/rpe_test
   6: ocean/baroclinic_channel/10km/rpe_test
   7: ocean/global_convergence/qu/cosine_bell
   8: ocean/global_convergence/icos/cosine_bell
   9: ocean/yet_another_channel/1km/default
   10: ocean/yet_another_channel/4km/default
   11: ocean/yet_another_channel/10km/default
```

If they don't show up, you probably missed a step (adding the test group to the
component or the test case to the test group).  If you get import errors or
syntax errors, you'll need to fix those first.

If listing works out, it's time to set up one of your tests.  Probably start
with one that's pretty light weight and fast to run.  In this case, that's the

> 10 km `defatult` (test number 11):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10 km `default` (test number 11):
```

```bash
$ polaris setup -n 11 -p <E3SM_component> -w <work_dir>
```
See {ref}`dev-polaris-setup` for the details.  If that works, you're ready to
do a test run.  If you get errors during setup, you have some debugging to do.

You can run the test with a job script or an interactive node.  For debugging,
the interactive node is usually more efficient.  To run the test case, open a 
new terminal, go to the work directory, start an interactive session on
however many nodes you need (most often 1 when you're just debugging something
small) and for a long enough time that your debugging doesn't get interrupted,
e.g. on Chrysalis:
```bash
$ cd <work_dir>
$ srun -N 1 -t 2:00:00 --pty bash
```

> Then, on the interactive node, source the local link the load script and run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Let's navigate into the test case directory and see what it looks like:
```bash
$ cd ocean/yet_another_channel/10km/default
$ ls
default.cfg  load_polaris_env.sh   initial_state  job_script.sh      test_case.pickle
[```end bash]

If we open up `default.cfg` we can see that it contains our newly added `yet_another_channel` section along with a bunch of other sections. Let's go to the `test_case` section, where you will see `steps_to_run = initial_state`. This means that when we run our case, the initial condition should be generated if we didn't make any mistakes in setting up the step (fingers crossed!).

Then, on the interactive node, source the local link the load script and run:
```

Author: I believe you can use quadruple-backticks and nest triple-backticks inside of them (and I can use quintuple backticks to demonstrate quadruple-backtick).
`````
````suggestion
Then, on the interactive node, source the local link the load script and run:
```bash
blah
```
````
`````

Reviewer: Thanks! I was wondering how to make that work

component or the test case to the test group).  If you get import errors or
syntax errors, you'll need to fix those first.

If listing works out, it's time to set up one of your tests.  Probably start
with one that's pretty light weight and fast to run.  In this case, that's the
10 km `defatult` (test number 11):

```bash
$ polaris setup -n 11 -p <E3SM_component> -w <work_dir>
```
See {ref}`dev-polaris-setup` for the details.  If that works, you're ready to
do a test run.  If you get errors during setup, you have some debugging to do.

You can run the test with a job script or an interactive node.  For debugging,
the interactive node is usually more efficient.  To run the test case, open a 
new terminal, go to the work directory, start an interactive session on
however many nodes you need (most often 1 when you're just debugging something
small) and for a long enough time that your debugging doesn't get interrupted,
e.g. on Chrysalis:
```bash
$ cd <work_dir>
$ srun -N 1 -t 2:00:00 --pty bash
```
Then, on the interactive node, source the local link the load script and run:
```bash
$ source load_polaris_env.sh
$ polaris serial
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Now let's see what's in the `initial_state` directory:

```bash
$cd initial_state
$ ls
base_mesh.nc               default.cfg                initial_state.nc
culled_graph.info          initial_normalVelocity.png initial_temperature.png
culled_mesh.nc             initial_salinity.png       step.pickle
[```end bash]

Our `initial_state.nc` file is there for use in running MPAS-Ocean in the next step. Let's also take a look at the image files and make sure our initial condition looks as expected.

```

class DecompTest(TestCase):
    """
    A decomposition test case for the baroclinic channel test group, which
    makes sure the model produces identical results on 1 and 4 cores.

    Attributes
    ----------
    resolution : float
        The resolution of the test case in km    
    """

    def __init__(self, test_group, resolution):
        """
        Create the test case

        Parameters
        ----------
        test_group : polaris.ocean.tests.yet_another_channel.YetAnotherChannel
            The test group that this test case belongs to

        resolution : float
            The resolution of the test case in km
        """
        name = 'default'
        self.resolution = resolution
        if resolution >= 1.:
            res_str = f'{resolution:g}km'
        else:
            res_str = f'{resolution * 1000.:g}m'
        subdir = os.path.join(res_str, name)
        super().__init__(test_group=test_group, name=name,
                         subdir=subdir)
        self.add_step(
            InitialState(test_case=self, resolution=resolution))
```

But then it does a second forward run on 8 cores instead of 4 and compares the

> results to make sure they are identical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
results to make sure they are identical. Each of these runs is performed in its own step.
```

{py:func}`polaris.mesh.planar.compute_planar_hex_nx_ny()` to get `nx` and `ny`
(and thus the total cell count) during setup because we have no other way to
get them (the initial condition has not yet been created, for example).  But
at runtime, rather than recomputing them, we look at the initial condition
file that must exist (otherwise the step already would have failed) to see
what the actual number of cells ended up being.

`cell_count` is used in `OceanModelStep` to compute `ntasks` and `min_tasks`
by also using 2 config options:
```cfg
# Options related the ocean component
[ocean]

# the number of cells per core to aim for
goal_cells_per_core = 200

# the approximate maximum number of cells per core (the test will fail if too
# few cores are available)
max_cells_per_core = 2000
```

This method is only used if `ntasks` and `min_tasks` aren't explicitly defined
as parameters to the constructor.

So far, there isn't a equivalent process for MALI, so `ntasks` and `min_tasks`
should be set explicitly either when constructing a test case or by overriding
the {py:meth}`polaris.Step.setup()` or 
{py:meth}`polaris.Step.constrain_resources()` methods.

> ### Adding dynamic model config options

Reviewer: Can we move this section to right after "Adding model config options in code"?

    cores.
    """

    def __init__(self, test_group, resolution):
        """
        Create the test case

        Parameters
        ----------
        test_group : polaris.ocean.tests.yet_another_channel.YetAnotherChannel
            The test group that this test case belongs to

        resolution : float
            The resolution of the test case in km
        """
        super().__init__(test_group=test_group, resolution=resolution,
                         name='default')

        self.add_step(
            Forward(test_case=self, ntasks=4, min_tasks=4, openmp_threads=1,
                    resolution=resolution))

        self.add_step(
            Viz(test_case=self))

    def validate(self):
        """
        Compare ``temperature``, ``salinity``, ``layerThickness`` and
        ``normalVelocity`` in the ``forward`` step with a baseline if one was
        provided.
        """
        super().validate()
        variables = ['temperature', 'salinity', 'layerThickness',
                     'normalVelocity']
        compare_variables(test_case=self, variables=variables,
                          filename1='forward/output.nc')

```

### Adding a parameter study

> The `yet_another_channel` test group contains several test cases in addition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `baroclinic_channel` test group contains several test cases in addition
```

I think we want to keep this `baroclinic_channel` because the tutorial subject will not have added all these test cases by this point.

> The `yet_another_channel` test group contains several test cases in addition
> to `default`.  The `restart_test` checks whether running the model for one
> times step, writing out a restart file, loading the model state from the
> restart file, and running for another time step produces the same results as
> running for 2 time steps.  The `decomp_test` and `threads_test` check
> whether the results are the same when the model runs on different numbers of
> cores and threads, respectively.

Reviewer: Actually, I think we can delete this paragraph.

```suggestion
The typical structure for a parameter study is to explore each parameter choice in a separate step (or steps) within a single test case. In addition to running the model for each of these parameter choices, there is typically a separate step for analyzing the behavior across the parameter set, using the output from each of the forward steps. 

A convergence study is one example of this, where each resolution and time step combination is run and then an analysis step computes the rate of convergence from the results. We won't cover this example here, in part because a resolution study involves both a forward step and an initial condition step for each resolution in order to generate unique meshes for each step. You may refer to [insert reference to cosine bell case here] for these details. Instead, we will explore the `rpe_test` for the `baroclinic_channel` test group, which only requires unique forward runs for different viscosity values. 

```

Formatting needed

> The most interesting test case is the `rpe_test`, which has been used to show

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `rpe_test` has been used to show
```
